Add Trino 465 release notes (#23987)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-465.md

# Release 465 (19 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for parameter of `bigint` type for the {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`22867`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)
* Improve performance of queries with selective joins. ({issue}`22824`)
* Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based
  connectors. ({issue}`24058`)
* Reduce chance of out of memory query failure when `retry-policy` is set to
  `task`. ({issue}`24114`)

## JDBC driver

* Add support for `LocalDateTime` and `Instant` in `getObject` and `setObject`. ({issue}`22906`)

## CLI

* Fix incorrect quoting of output values when the `CSV_UNQUOTED` or the 
  `CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED` format is used. ({issue}`24113`)

## BigQuery connector 

* Fix failure when reading views with `timestamp` columns. ({issue}`24004`)

## Cassandra connector

> * {{breaking}} Require setting `cassandra.security=PASSWORD` along with
>   `cassandra.username` and `cassandra.password` for password-based
>   authentication. ({issue}`23899`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {{breaking}} Require setting the `cassandra.security` configuration property
  to `PASSWORD` along with `cassandra.username` and `cassandra.password`
  for password-based authentication. ({issue}`23899`)
```

  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for parameter of `bigint` type for the {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`22867`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)
* Improve performance of queries with selective joins. ({issue}`22824`)
* Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based
  connectors. ({issue}`24058`)
* Reduce chance of out of memory query failure when `retry-policy` is set to
  `task`. ({issue}`24114`)

## JDBC driver

* Add support for `LocalDateTime` and `Instant` in `getObject` and `setObject`. ({issue}`22906`)

## CLI

* Fix incorrect quoting of output values when the `CSV_UNQUOTED` or the 
  `CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED` format is used. ({issue}`24113`)

## BigQuery connector 

* Fix failure when reading views with `timestamp` columns. ({issue}`24004`)

## Cassandra connector

* {{breaking}} Require setting the `cassandra.security` configuration property
  to `PASSWORD` along with `cassandra.username` and `cassandra.password` for
  password-based authentication. ({issue}`23899`)

## Clickhouse connector

> * Fix insert for tables with the Clickhouse `TimestampWithTimeZone` type. ({issue}`23785`)

Reviewer 2: `TimestampWithTimeZone` is a Java class name. We should change to `timestamp with time zone`. 

Also, no need to repeat `Clickhouse`. This is under `Clickhouse connector` section.

  `true`. ({issue}`23817`)
* Add support for customer-provided SSE key in [S3 file
  system](/object-storage/file-system-s3). ({issue}`22992`)

## Hudi connector

* Add support for customer-provided SSE key in [S3 file
  system](/object-storage/file-system-s3). ({issue}`22992`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for reading and writing arbitrary table properties with the
  `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`, {issue}`24031`)
* Add the `spec_id`, `partition`, `sort_order_id`, and `readable_metrics`
  columns to the `$files` metadata table. ({issue}`24102`)
* Add support for configuring an OAuth2 server URI with the
  `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.server-uri` configuration property. ({issue}`23086`)
* Add support for retrying requests to a JDBC catalog with the
  `iceberg.jdbc-catalog.retryable-status-codes` configuration property.
  ({issue}`23095`)
* Add support for case-insensitive name matching in the REST catalog. ({issue}`23715`)
* Add support for customer-provided SSE key in [S3 file
  system](/object-storage/file-system-s3). ({issue}`22992`)
* Improve performance of Iceberg queries involving multiple table scans. ({issue}`23945`)

> * Fix Iceberg merge, update, delete, for tables with equality deletes. ({issue}`15952`)

Author: What do you mean by "Fix" @dain .. what was going wrong before?

Reviewer 3: If you had a table with an equality delete, so something like Flink, and then you run a Trino Merge command on that table, you get an error and the query fails.  Trino does not produce equality deltes (only position deltes), and I think the same is true for Spark, so this has to be something like Flink.  Equality deletes are thus are super rare and when you have them, the merge queries just don't work.

Author: Cool.. reworded a bit.

# Release 465 (20 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for parameter of `bigint` type for the {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`22867`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)
* {{breaking}} Change the data type for `client_info` in the MySQL event
  listener to `MEDIUMTEXT`. ({issue}`22362`)

> * Improve performance of queries with selective joins. ({issue}`22824`)

Reviewer 4: I just spent like 10 minutes looking for this, can release notes mention names of the properties when we change their default values, like `enable-dynamic-filtering` in this case? Users might want to remove them from their configs if they don't change the default value anymore.

# Release 465 (20 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for parameter of `bigint` type for the {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`22867`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)

> * Expose query start count and rate metrics for resource groups. ({issue}`23984`)

Author: Changed to

Add query start count and rate metrics to resource groups.

but not sure how this is available to users .. we might need docs @xkrogen

> * Expose query start count and rate metrics for resource groups. ({issue}`23984`)

Reviewer 5: It's exposed in JMX, alongside all of the other resource group metrics.

> * Expose query start count and rate metrics for resource groups. ({issue}`23984`)

Reviewer 5: The question is good though @martint -- this was a miss on my part 🙂 I would phrase this as:
```markdown
* Add resource group query start count/rate statistics to JMX. ({issue}`23984`)
```

@mosabua re: docs, currently [this is the only documentation](https://trino.io/docs/current/admin/resource-groups.html#:~:text=jmxExport%20(optional)%3A%20If%20true%2C%20group%20statistics%20are%20exported%20to%20JMX%20for%20monitoring.%20Defaults%20to%20false.) we have on the ResourceGroup JMX stats
> `jmxExport` (optional): If true, group statistics are exported to JMX for monitoring. Defaults to false.

More info would be useful, but at least currently, I don't think _any_ JMX stats are really well documented, not just the ResourceGroup ones.

> * Expose query start count and rate metrics for resource groups. ({issue}`23984`)

Author: JMX, we removed that entry

> * {{breaking}} Update the required [](jvm-config). ({issue}`24161`)

Reviewer 6: This is too vague. What's required?

Also, what change in this release requires users to specify new JVM config options? It doesn't seem like there's anything in this release that introduces a breaking change.

Author: The security manager stuff was added .. I also updated the old release notes to link to the jvm config when we made 23 a requirement .. so maybe we can drop it here.. but now is when we found out... soo .. not sure

Author: Removed - also others.

* {{breaking}} Change the data type for `client_info` in the MySQL event
  listener to `MEDIUMTEXT`. ({issue}`22362`)
* Improve performance of queries with selective joins. ({issue}`22824`)
* Improve performance when using various string functions in queries involving
  joins. ({issue}`24182`)
* Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based
  connectors. ({issue}`24058`)
* Reduce chance of out of memory query failure when `retry-policy` is set to
  `task`. ({issue}`24114`)
* Prevent some query failures when `retry-policy` is set to `task`. ({issue}`24165`)

## Server RPM

> * {{breaking}} Update the required [](jvm-config). ({issue}`24161`)

Reviewer 6: See earlier comments.

Author: Here its actually a factual change on the config in the RPM (and container) so if people reuse and customize they should find out. I think we should at least have the entry .. maybe remove the breaking ..

## Docker image

> * {{breaking}} Update the required [](jvm-config). ({issue}`24161`)

Reviewer 6: See earlier comments.

  system](/object-storage/file-system-s3). ({issue}`22992`)

## Hudi connector

* Add support for customer-provided SSE key in [S3 file
  system](/object-storage/file-system-s3). ({issue}`22992`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for reading and writing arbitrary table properties with the
  `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`, {issue}`24031`)
* Add the `spec_id`, `partition`, `sort_order_id`, and `readable_metrics`
  columns to the `$files` metadata table. ({issue}`24102`)
* Add support for configuring an OAuth2 server URI with the
  `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.server-uri` configuration property. ({issue}`23086`)
* Add support for retrying requests to a JDBC catalog with the
  `iceberg.jdbc-catalog.retryable-status-codes` configuration property.
  ({issue}`23095`)
* Add support for case-insensitive name matching in the REST catalog. ({issue}`23715`)
* Add support for customer-provided SSE key in [S3 file
  system](/object-storage/file-system-s3). ({issue}`22992`)
* Disallow adding duplicate files in the `add_files` and `add_files_from_table`
  procedures. ({issue}`24188`)
* Improve performance of Iceberg queries involving multiple table scans. ({issue}`23945`)

> * Prevent merge, update, and delete query failures for tables with equality deletes. ({issue}`15952`)

Reviewer 6: `MERGE`, `UPDATE` and `DELETE`

# Release 465 (7 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)

> * Add support for reading geometries in EWKB files with the `ST_GeomFromBinary`

Reviewer: Might want to spell out or link to what EWKB files are, this is a new concept to me.

Author: added a link

  function. ({issue}`23824`) 

> * Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in aggregate functions used with a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for using an `ORDER BY` clause in aggregate functions used with a
```

Reviewer 6: ... in a windowed aggregate function.

  window context. ({issue}`23929`)

> * Add Accumulator and Group by hash CPU time metrics to verbose explain plans. ({issue}`21925`)

Author: @martint @losipiuk @raunaqmorarka @sopel39 .. this replicates the wording in the explain plan a bit but I am not convinced this is right .. here or in the explain plan - see the PR

Reviewer: should it be group-by-hash or "Group by hash" or something like that?

Reviewer 6: I don't think we should document this in release notes. These are low level metrics not intended for end users.

Author: ok

> * Add Accumulator and Group by hash CPU time metrics to verbose explain plans. ({issue}`21925`)

Reviewer 6: It's not an "explain plan". It's "the output of EXPLAIN ANALYZE".

Author: we removed this anyway..

## Faker connector 

> * Add the `random_string` catalog function to test Datafaker expressions for

Reviewer 6: What's a "Datafaker expression"?

Author: Datafaker is the library that is used to generate the random data .. and it has its own little expression language .. the function allows you to test these before using them in a table creation for a column. For now I just left out the word "Datafaker" and I think thats actually fine .. more is in the docs for the function in the connector.

Author: I made it so it now links and therefore made it shorter.

  random string creation. ({issue}`23990`)

> * Make generated data deterministic for repeated queries. ({issue}`24008`)

Author: Any better suggestions @raunaqmorarka @nineinchnick @martint ?

Reviewer 6: I think that's good enough.

## Hive connector

> * Add support to skip archiving when committing to a table in the Glue metastore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for skipping archiving when committing to a table in the Glue metastore
```

Author: double "ing" .. still ok @colebow ?

  and the `hive.metastore.glue.skip-archive` configuration property is set to
  `true`. ({issue}`23817`)

> * Use drop and create operation when replacing an existing SQL routine stored in

Reviewer 6: Not sure what this means. What's the user-visible impact?

Author: that is my question to the maintainers and contributors as well

Author: @findinpath @ebyhr @electrum  ?

I kinda think that there is no user facing impact and we might drop the entry..

Author: Removed

  the Hive Metastore. ({issue}`24010`)

## Iceberg connector

> * Add support for reading the `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`)

Author: Do we really want two entries? And if not .. which PR do we link to.. or link to both? @findinpath @ebyhr @sopel39

Reviewer: Link to both. You can do:
```Add support for setting and reading the `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`, {issue}`24031`)```

Author: Done

> * Add support for reading the `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`)

Reviewer 6: What's the user visible impact? Where is it read? What functionality in Trino or the Iceberg connector is affected by this?

Author: Updated to use similar wording from when we added that feature for Hive tables.. just allows reading and writing arbitrary table properties

* Add support for setting the `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`24031`)

> * Add support to configure an OAuth2 server URI with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for configuring an OAuth2 server URI with the
```

# Release 465 (13 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)

> * Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based

Author: I think we dont need this entry .. wdyt @martint

Reviewer 7: it's not leakage, the configuration wasn't always applied correctly if there were two or more catalogs of the same connector

Author: That was the suggested release notes entry .. but I am questioning if we need to add that info all .. I dont think we need to

Reviewer 6: Maybe "Fix connector initialization issue when multiple instances of the connector are present under different catalogs".

Also, this should go in each of the jdbc-based connectors, and the entry should not mention "JDBC-based connector". That's an implementation detail that's hidden from users.

Author: I did not move it into the different connectors because I kinda think we might not even want that entry at all .. can you confirm we want to add it .. then I will rejig to the different affected connectors

Reviewer 6: It fixes a bug when there are multiple instantiations of a connector, so I think it's worth mentioning. But it needs to be rephrased.

Author: Reworded and spread out.

Reviewer 6: Remove this entry from the general section.

Author: ooops - done

# Release 465 (14 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)
* Improve performance of queries with selective joins on large build sides. ({issue}`22824`)
* Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based
  connectors. ({issue}`24058`)
* Lower probability of queries failing when running with task retries due to
  running out task descriptors memory. ({issue}`24114`)

## CLI

> * Fix quoting of output values when `CSV_UNQUOTED` or `CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED`

Reviewer: What's wrong with the quoting? If we're still including quotes despite it needing to be unquoted, maybe "Fix incorrect quotation of output values"

# Release 465 (13 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)

> * Collect larger dynamic filters to improve performance of queries with

Author: Maybe we can use the terms "large build sides" .. thats a pretty common terminology

> * Collect larger dynamic filters to improve performance of queries with

Author: @martint .. so should I remove the larger build side stuff again?

  selective joins. ({issue}`22824`)
* Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based
  connectors. ({issue}`24058`)

> * Lower probability of queries failing when running with task retries due to

Author: I feel like this proposed entry from @losipiuk is too low level. Can we change to just use something like

Reduce query failures when running with task retries.

Reviewer 8: Or you can just drop it too. Fine to me either way.

Author: @martint ?

Reviewer: I lean towards including things like this just because it's nice to show off that work's getting done.

```Reduce chance of out of memory query failure when `retry-policy` is set to `task`.```

or something like that is clear enough, and anyone looking for more info can click in

Author: Thats good.

  running out task descriptors memory. ({issue}`24114`)

## CLI

* Fix quoting of output values when `CSV_UNQUOTED` or `CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED`
  format is used. ({issue}`24113`)

## BigQuery connector 

* Fix failure when reading views with `timestamp` columns. ({issue}`24004`)

## Cassandra connector

> * Set `cassandra.security=PASSWORD` along with `cassandra.username` and

Author: @Praveen2112 .. is this now required and if yes.. is it a breaking change or does it automatically add it when a username

Reviewer: Are we saying that the `cassandra.security` configuration property is being automatically set if you provide a username and password? Needs to be reworded in some way.

Reviewer 2: It's required now. Not automatically.

# Release 465 (15 Nov 2024)

## General

* Add the {func}`cosine_similarity` function for dense vectors. ({issue}`23964`)
* Add support for reading geometries in [EWKB
  format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry)
  with the {func}`ST_GeomFromBinary` function. ({issue}`23824`)
* Add support for the `ORDER BY` clause in a windowed aggregate function. ({issue}`23929`)

> * Improve performance of queries with selective joins on large build sides. ({issue}`22824`)

Reviewer 6: "build side" is an implementation detail that's not visible to users.

Reviewer 6: This is still not resolved.

* Fix potential configuration leakage between catalogs using JDBC-based
  connectors. ({issue}`24058`)
* Reduce chance of out of memory query failure when `retry-policy` is set to
  `task`. ({issue}`24114`)

## CLI

* Fix incorrect quoting of output values when the `CSV_UNQUOTED` or the 
  `CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED` format is used. ({issue}`24113`)

## BigQuery connector 

* Fix failure when reading views with `timestamp` columns. ({issue}`24004`)

## Cassandra connector

* {{breaking}} Require setting `cassandra.security=PASSWORD` along with

>   `cassandra.username` and `cassandra.password` for  password-based

Reviewer 6: Extra space between "for" and "password-based"

  authentication. ({issue}`23899`)

## Clickhouse connector

> * Fix insert for tables with the Clickhouse `TimestampWithTimeZone` type. ({issue}`23785`)

Reviewer 6: What was fixed? How was it broken? (Incorrect results, query failures, etc).

Author: @ssheikin @Praveen2112 .. not sure how it was broken before from looking the the PR ... did it actually fail or did it use to insert incorrect data?

Reviewer 9: If a row has a timestamp with different zone when compared with the zone specified as a part of column - then it is not normalized when inserting into clickhouse.

Author: So it looks like it inserted wrong data in the past .. correct?

Reviewer 10: Yes

## Delta Lake connector

> * Fix incorrect results when filtering partition columns on checkpoints with

Reviewer 6: I don't understand what this means.

Author: The bug shows example queries. I think the column_mapping_mode='NAME' is a Delta Lake specific thing and this fixes a related issue. Not sure how to best simplify .. any input @ebyhr or @findinpath ? Should we be explicit with `column_mapping_mode='NAME'` in the entry?

Reviewer 6: I'm less concerned about the column mapping mode bit than what "filtering partition columns on checkpoints" means.

Author: I reworded.. hopefully this is fine now.

  `NAME` column mapping mode. ({issue}`24104`)

## Faker connector

* Add the `random_string` catalog function to test expressions for random string
  creation. ({issue}`23990`)
* Make generated data deterministic for repeated queries. ({issue}`24008`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for skipping archiving when committing to a table in the Glue metastore
  and the `hive.metastore.glue.skip-archive` configuration property is set to
  `true`. ({issue}`23817`)
* Use drop and create operation when replacing an existing SQL routine stored in
  the Hive Metastore. ({issue}`24010`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for reading and writing arbitrary table properties with the
  `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`, {issue}`24031`)
* Add support for configuring an OAuth2 server URI with the
  `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.server-uri` configuration property. ({issue}`23086`)
* Improve performance of Iceberg queries involving multiple table scans. ({issue}`23945`)

## Redshift connector

> * Add varchar/char cast pushdown support. ({issue}`23808`)

Reviewer 6: Is this a for casts *from* or *to* varchar/char?

Author: not sure .. they PR talks about cast projection pushdown. @mayankvadariya ?

Reviewer 11: cast from `varchar` to `varchar` and `char` to `char` having different precisions.

Author: Updated

## Clickhouse connector

* Fix insert for tables with the Clickhouse `TimestampWithTimeZone` type. ({issue}`23785`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Fix incorrect results when filtering partition columns on checkpoints with
  `NAME` column mapping mode. ({issue}`24104`)

## Faker connector

* Add the {func}`random_string` catalog function. ({issue}`23990`)
* Make generated data deterministic for repeated queries. ({issue}`24008`)
* Allow configuring locale with the `faker.locale` configuration property. ({issue}`24152`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for skipping archiving when committing to a table in the Glue metastore
  and the `hive.metastore.glue.skip-archive` configuration property is set to
  `true`. ({issue}`23817`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for reading and writing arbitrary table properties with the
  `extra_properties` table property. ({issue}`17427`, {issue}`24031`)
* Add the `spec_id`, `partition`, `sort_order_id`, and `readable_metrics`
  columns to the `$files` metadata table. ({issue}`24102`)
* Add support for configuring an OAuth2 server URI with the
  `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.server-uri` configuration property. ({issue}`23086`)

> * Add support to retry connecting to the JBDC catalog with JDBC connection error

Reviewer 6: What does "retry ... with JDBC connection error codes" mean? I would simplify the entry and just say:

> Add support for retrying requests to a JDBC catalog.

Author: Done but left config property name in place.

  codes specified with the `iceberg.jdbc-catalog.retryable-status-codes`
  configuration property.  ({issue}`23095`)
* Add support for case-insensitive name matching in the REST catalog. ({issue}`23715`)
* Improve performance of Iceberg queries involving multiple table scans. ({issue}`23945`)

## Redshift connector

> * Add `char` to `char` and `varchar` to `varchar` cast projection pushdown

Reviewer 6: > Add support pushing down casts from varchar to varchar and char to char into Redshift.
